This man, a "just another good player" of
the Mumbai Indians team… how.. how did he
become the captain, the winning captain of
Gujarat Titans? What is the actual formula
for winning teams? Shall we take a look?
Namaste!
How did Hardik Pandya, the "just another good
player", become the winning captain? The answer
to that question, I think, lies in the team,
and its composition. That is what this lady
thought too. Her name is Julia Rozovsky. She
is a Yale graduate, and she worked at Google
for many many years. One of the most important
contributions she made at Google was called
Project Aristotle. Whaaat? Why Aristotle here?
Is that what you are thinking? Well, it was
Aristotle who contributed this most interesting
quote. This is what he said. We have heard
of this one before, but perhaps, now, we learn
that it was he who contributed this to the
world first! "The whole is actually greater
than the sum of its parts". If you bring two
and two together, to think the answer will
always be four is… wrong! Could be five!
Wait.. Could even be twenty-two. It is in
how they come together! That is what really
matters! So, they called it Project Aristotle,
and they did a multi-year research on what
kind of teams exist, do they perform very
well, what makes them perform well, what are
the common characteristics among teams that
are excellent, and so on.
Before getting into the results of the research
I want to distinguish between a Workgroup
and a Team here. In a Workgroup, the interdependence
is minimal. I do my work. You do yours. Just
get the work done, and get a move on. The
hierarchy is very clearly laid out. You can't,
just like that, go and interact with somebody,
do a joint project with somebody else, and
so on. And, meetings are all well-aligned,
regular, scheduled, timely, with an agenda,
who is supposed to speak what, what decisions,
etc… That is a Workgroup. It is focused
on a particular delivery being done.
On the other hand, a Team is dependent on
a lot of interaction. Everything is interconnected.
It is almost as if nobody can do their work
without everybody else contributing! It is
cohesive! And that structure is called a Team.
While Workgroups are Results-oriented, Goals-oriented,
here, the Teams are actually focused and oriented
on Team Synergy. And, over time, one thing
we have all realised is, when you work and
perform as a team, you tend to innovate faster,
you see mistakes, made by yourself, made by
others, more quickly, and actually, you are
able to find better solutions faster.
Workgroups and Teams - if you were to
look at a sports analogy for this whole thing,
you would say a Workgroup is like a Tennis
team… Remember The Davis Cup, for example?
A will play with B. C will play with D. A
will play with D. C will play with B. That's
it. When I am in the tennis court, I am an
individual doing my own thing, and I have
to win.. And I win or lose based on my abilities.
That is not the case with a game like football
or basketball. Over there, there is a team
orchestration. Everybody has to depend on
everybody else for anybody to think of winning.
That is where the beauty lies. If we were
to take an example company, we saw Creative
Selection by Ken Kocienda. The repeated refrain
in that book is that they were actually working
in airtight silos. They were Workgroups. "This
is me. This is my work. And that's all that
matters. Sometimes, we couldn't even let others
know what we were working on!" If you were
to take a counter-example, my company, Zoho
Corp, is a team-driven company. Everything
is interconnected with everything else. Beautifully
orchestrated, almost like a symphony!
That lady, Julia, before telling us what WORKS,
she also lays out what doesn't really matter.
You want a good team structure? You want a
long-sustained life for your team? You don't
need to bother about these, for that - she
lays out very clearly. What are those? Well,
here is one that is extra-important because
of the current Covid situation. Should we
all be in the same location? Should we all
come to office?? No. Not needed. Should all
be outspoken? Straightforward? Gossippy? Talkative?
Jocular? Extroverted? No! Not needed! Do we
need superstars? One or two top performers?
Will the team somehow grow and prosper around
them? No! Not needed! Seniority? Do we need
golden oldies who have been there, done that?
Who have seen it all? No! Not needed! And,
does team size matter? Will a team be cohesive
only if it is less than twenty people? Remember
that Two-Pizza rule by Jeff Bezos we have
encountered before? Is a large team bound
to collapse and eventually die? No! Not again!
Finally, does workload matter? Will the pressure
at work have a negative impact? This is actually
a surprising discovery. The kind of work you
do, the workload does not matter, when you
are talking about the perfect team composition,
and long-lasting team happiness.
Well, what matters then? She gives us five
beautiful answers.
Number One is Psychological Safety! What is
Psychological Safety? Well, it will be immediately
apparent, the moment you see this picture.
In 2020, RCB had sacked their batting coach
and their bowling coach. Do you think that
was the right decision? Do you think RCB won
in '21 and '22? Wait.. Do you know where Nehra
and Kirsten are today? They are the bowling
coach and the batting coach of Gujarat Titans!
Do you get the irony? So, when you are part
of a team, you need to have the confidence
and the courage to take a risk! You need the
rights to "bungle" and "screw up madly". If
you accept your mistake, there shouldn't be
any punishment for it! If you offer a silly
idea, it should still be acknowledged, even
if it is not welcomed! It is okay to seem
ignorant, nobody is going to mock at you with
"Don't you know even this simple matter?!"
Those form psychological safety! And that
is such an important ingredient, according
to that research!
Numer Two is Dependability. What is Dependability?
Every time, consistently, high quality work,
in a timely manner,… if everybody has
the sense to do work this way, you have it
made! They should all have that sense deeply
ingrained in them. Reliable. Complete. High
quality work. On time. Yesterday, I was having
a chat with one of my colleagues. Look at
our "chemistry". I asked him about a summarised
report that I wanted… by 4 PM today. And,
he responded with "Done!" It was 2 PM then.
I had given that work just then. I was shocked!
"Wow! Already? That's amazing! Send it over!"
I exclaimed. And that's when the cat was let
out of the bag… "I meant 'consider it done'…
(Just assume that it will be done soon!)"
Here I am. Already on the job. Will be ready
soon". So, this understanding.. The meaning
of the word "Dependable" comes only over time.
Comes only when you deliver, reliably, on
time, high quality. If you bring that about,
you near perfection a bit more!
Number Three is Structure and Clarity. Structure
is all about who do you report to, who do
you work with, who works for you, the hierarchical
structure… And beyond that, Clarity is about
"What is my role here, What is expected out
of me, How do I fulfil them? What are the
consequences if I fulfil? If I don't fulfil?
What are the goals?" Are these clear to every
individual in the team? This is a question
you need to keep asking your team, at least
once in a while. You cannot assume people
already know. That they would ask if they
are in doubt. The reason I used this picture
from the Second World War is pretty simple.
This is from the Pearl Harbour Bombing. A
very important moment in World War II. America
was not part of the war yet, and Japan bombed
Pearl Harbour and won a little battle… but
it lost the war. It woke up a sleeping giant…
The United States.. without having any idea
how formidable an opponent it was.. and got
thrashed. Why? Structure and Clarity were
missing. They didn't have an understanding
of what was expected of them. They didn't
have to win the battle.. They had to win the
war.
Number Four is the question that faces probably
every teenager who is about to enter the workforce
today. What's in it for me? Why should I do
this? That existential question. I have used
the picture of a greyhound chasing a rabbit.
There is an Aesop Fable about this too. The
story goes that the hound is chasing the rabbit
and two people are commenting? - Do you
think the hound will win? Do you think the
rabbit will win? - The hound's supporter
and friend shouts - "The hound will win!
Of course! Of course!" - To which, a person
who knows the rabbit only too well, quips,
"No way the hound is going to win. Because,
the hound is doing it considering it a job…
its master has asked it to chase, and it is
chasing. What about the rabbit? The rabbit
is running for its life! Do you think the
hound will ever win? No way!" This is it!
What is your sense of purpose? What motivates
you? What is the meaning of your work? Are
you doing it for the pay? Are you doing it
to take care of your family? Are you doing
it for personal fame? Or, are you here to
scratch a personal itch? Or, are you trying
to bring about lasting social change and societal
transformation!? That question! We need to
help our team members answer that question
and that's how you get closer to perfection.
Finally, What is the impact?! This is the
classic photograph featuring Sculley, John
Sculley, and Steve Jobs. John Sculley was
the CEO of Pepsi at that time. Steve Jobs
approached him, told him that Apple was poised
to become a world-class company, implored
him to come over! "Let's change the world,
join us!" - he encouraged! But, Sculley
was two-minded… He felt he was all settled
at Pepsi already, to which Steve Jobs is famously
known to have closed the historic deal with
"Do you want to continue selling sugared water
for the rest of your life, or do you want
to join me and make a dent in the universe?!
We will change the world, come, here is an
opportunity like never before!" - He is
supposed to have said thus, or at least the
myth or story says so. Making a difference.
Beyond my own circle… My benefits. My job.
My career. My calling.. We have seen "Start
With Why" and its importance already. What
is that Why? And, is what I am doing going
beyond just helping me get better? Is it making
the organisation reach its goals? Beyond organisational
goals, does it help the society reach its
goals? That alignment, if you can get that
done, you are part of an amazing team.
Interesting thing she does, this lady, she
talks about something called Average Social
Sensitivity. For a team manager, or even for
the members of the team, there has to be this
thing called Average Social Sensitivity. What
is that? From a person's tone of voice, from
a person's expressions, from their nonverbal
cues, can we find out if that person is upset?
If that person is feeling left out? Can you
detect it? They also give an interesting test
for that, and I found out that this test is
available for free online! It is called the
"Reading The Mind In The Eyes" Test. Just
by looking at the eyes, can you guess what
they are thinking? What they are feeling?
I have created a short URL for you. Visit
https://bit.ly/mindeyes and take the test!
It might take a max of fifteen minutes.
This is how the test is going to look. You
will be shown "eyes". And you'll have to find
out. What the person is actually feeling.
Are they playful? Are they comforting? Are
they bored or irritated?! In this case, they
are Playful.
Are they joking? Or, are they flustered? Or,
are they convinced? Or, is there desire in
the eyes? In this case, there is desire in
the eyes.
It goes on. About thirty-six questions, one
after the other. I got thirty-three out of
thirty-six, and they claim it is a good score!
You take your score, and tell me how you did!
Because, it seems you will be good at understanding
someone's mental state based on facial cues,
and if you do that well, you can be part of
an amazing team, you can lead a team into
success and greatness.
Okay…! Closing thought?! Nothing else. I
am just going to do that! And, tell me? What
my current emotion is?! We will meet again,
on June 4th. Thank you!